---
layout: post
title: Logarithmic Property Proof
---

The very well-known property of logarithms known as the product rule $\ln(ab) = \ln(a) + \ln(b)$ is used frequently in numerous areas of mathematics. I suppose the first time I was introduced to this property, I didn't question it's validity due to it's simplicity. Until recently, I didn't know how rich it's proof really is.

<!--more-->

Effectly, we start by defining two values $x$ and $y$ as
\begin{align}
    x &= \ln(a) & y &= \ln(b)
\end{align}
By construction of $x$ and $y$, $a = e^x$ and $b = e^y$ respectively. Then by multiplying the left hand sides by the right hand sides, we preserve equality and get

$$ ab = e^xe^y $$

Then by the multiplicative property of $e^x$, 

$$ ab = e^{x+y} $$

Take the logarithm of both sides,

$$ \ln(ab) = \ln(e^{x+y}) = x + y $$

And finally substituting in our definitions of $x$ and $y$,

$$ \ln(ab) = \ln(a) + \ln(b) $$

As required. 

However, this really shouldn't feel satisfying. We have used the multiplicative property of exponentials to prove the multiplicative property of logarithms. Given that the $\ln(x)$ is defined as the inverse of the function $e^x$, this should more or less be expected. Instead, all that we did was re-cast the issue to the proof of the exponential multiplicative property.

Using the [Taylor Series](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/TaylorSeries.html) of $e^x$,

$$ e^x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{x^n}{n!} $$

The product $e^xe^y$ gives,

$$ e^xe^y = \left(\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\frac{x^n}{n!}\right)\left(\sum_{m=0}^{\infty}\frac{y^m}{m!}\right) $$

Then by the [Cauchy Product](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cauchy_product) of these two series,

$$ e^xe^y = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} \sum_{k=0}^{j} \frac{x^k}{k!} \frac{y^{j-k}}{(j-k)!} $$

Multiply by $j!/j!$,

$$ e^xe^y = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{j!} \sum_{k=0}^{j} \frac{j!}{k!(j-k)!} x^k y^{j-k} = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{j!} \sum_{k=0}^{j} {j \choose k} x^k y^{j-k}$$

Recognize [Binomial Theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_theorem), 

$$ e^xe^y = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{j!} (x + y)^k $$

Which is exactly the Taylor Series of $e^{x+y}$.

$$ e^xe^y = e^{x+y} $$

From this, it can be seen that if fact $\ln(ab) = \ln(a) + \ln(b)$. Moreover, an identical analysis can be performed for $\ln(a/b) = \ln(a) - \ln(b)$.

If you want to know more about the historical significance of $\ln(ab) = \ln(a) + \ln(b)$, and excellent read is Ian Stewart's [In Pursuit of the Unknown: 17 Equations That Changed the World](http://www.amazon.ca/In-Pursuit-Unknown-Equations-Changed/dp/0465085989). It features this equation and has an excellent discussion on it's ability to simplify logarithmic calculations done by hand.